 objective wrongs in a gpx - scrubbed points at ingestion because of coords. missing/unparsable timestamps. missing unparsbale ele. these wiil be forwarded to the layers so that they know what points are already missing/to be missed in there funcitons they are going to carry out.


geometry and time.  

we need to scope it out for mvp. 

the biggest challenge rn is track  continuity checks with time to see if time rearrangement shat on geometry. 
okay a big revelation - the only way of checking track continuity while rearranging timestmps is through kinematic checks. for the rearrangements we do we do speed checks for continuity. 


off thought
for a reversed track with all timestamps backtracking. what we can do is reverse the array with js function and rearrange the initial array in ascending order and compare both of them, if they match we know we have a reversed track on our hands. even a high percentage similarity will prove it.


about track continuity while rearranging mixed. we are checking for two possibilities. we will see that upon rearranging the track has better continuity proved by kinematics and we can conclude that it was just a ordering fault in the gpx. if the continuity worsens much then we cannot treat timestamps as valid piece of artifact in the gpx. and will know that its not a rearranging fault and tiemstmpas were genuinely logged wrong for x reasons. 


before or during rearrangement we will have to see about duplicate timestamps that have different coords. a body cannot be present at two places at once. so either one or both of the points are wrong. what we can do is that we can check which of the coords give better kinematic continuity about its neighbours. and keep that. 

we also will have to check for time overlap beforehand or during rearrangement . 1 3 5 7 9 timestamps and 2 4 6 8 10 clearly dont ahve any duplicate/matching timestmap but clearly have overlapping time instances. 

we are doing all this because we dont know which truth to follow. timestmamps? or track order for geomery in the gpx? so we have to do this. even in the mvp. 


but then thats the thing there might be local backtracks that maybe write in geometry but just one off wrong timestmaps. we will have to make individual point kinematic checks. does that point produce better continuity remaining where it is or where its timestapm say it shud be. 

kinematic continuity cannot be solely relied on because a local backtrack which is just a minor backtrack 1 2 3 4 5 4 6 7. here the backtracking/non adjacent duplicate 4 will pretty much come off as kinematically continuous but 
idk this shit getting big af.


the duplicates points that dont produce better kinematic continuity shall be used in there original places if they didn't replace there counterparts or take there place or not be used at all and flagged as section of discomfort 

this model is heavily based on kinematics. is it a good thing? idk. are kinematics a better model to rely on than gpxsequence? idk. just writing down my thoughts.

kinematic continuity cannot rely only on a bucket. say human motion is always tops 30km an hr. but we cant do that. suppose the sampling rate is really high. then in that case many rearrangements even if wrong will yield okay results. in reality the person was travelling at constant 15km an hr but after continuity rearrangement the person between two points walk at 30km an hr and the next one he walks at 5 km an hr. 

this model is observation and comparison based. comparing which of the two - gpxsequecne or corrected timestmpa sequence gave us better geometry. incorrect timestamp will not be able to yield kinematics as speed between points of backtracks or duplicacy so we will have to deal with distance only in those instances. comparison is more of comparison with arranged timestamp sequence itself for kinematic exceptions that occurred because of rearrangement rather than with the inital gpx sequence. the task is which gives better continuity not the best, because kinematic smoothihng will take place after this stage. this is for checking route continuity  with kinematics

this solves alot of things and maximises utilization of provided data. 

this model and the conventional model both will need objective correction first. meaning knowledge of objective flags. - unparsable/absent timsetmaps, ele, scrubbed points at ingestion

conventional model also involved kinematics but as smooothingin only and not as checks. this assumed that timestamps/perfectly fitting timestamp or block of them like a jogsaw in another part of gpx that is missing is correct and rules over geometry. if we did that and did kinematic smoothing / removal after that considering that to be the right final gpx sequnece, that cud be really bad for avgs and all because if the timestmap was wrong and geometry was right and we still rearranged it, then geometry will suffer when what shud have happened is that that timesmtpa shudnt have been considered for time metrics at all, but geometry shud have. 

am i overcomplicating this maybe? shud we just remove that point? we can but in gpxs where this is structurally observant common issue, we lose alot of infothat cud have been used with a lil correction by not assuming all gpxs are perfect. 

the kinematic check model is sound imo for implementation and testing but for it to be implemented in the product it needs to be very thought off and sound. 

now , idk where tf i came up with this model myself while brainstorming and writing this txt file. is this revolutionary? maybe. is this something apps like strava  and all implement? likely not they resort to simpler checks and smoothing. 

about local small one off backtracks - i did say that they pose a problem but i dont think that they do. if its a singleton or part of a random backtracking sequence that isn't regressing or progressing local then we can check that if that point is a duplicate or not, if its a duplicate compare continuity of it at the right place according to the timestamp with the point thats already there, discard the one that is worse. actually no - why are we actually only just seeing what doesnt give continuity, what about what gives. like do we check a a localised backtrack first for continuity right where it already is and if its continuous then we dont evne check it at its timestampwise correct position?
about kinematic continuity - what shud it be? speed? definetly included, direction idk. i need more info on that what can be donewith time and coords and ele. 

holy, we completely forgot about elevation. elevation as we knwo is significantly more noisy than coords and time. so vertical normalization will have to take place beforhand so the kinematic checks work. but that begs the question again. if there is an export time fault in arrangement of gpxsequence. then elevation wont be right for that point and normalization will fail or be heavily skewed. i discussed earlier that if its not export time fault then ele mismatch with gpxindex is highly unlikely since measuring sensors of coords and time are mutually xclusive to ele sensor. what i mean by that is - elevation is not inserted as a result of coords. they are measured separately. which means if there is a big spike in actual coords. that doesnt mean the ele recorded was for the 'wrong coords' that were recorded. its still for teh real position with x% noise that is sensor native. 
so ye thats another big quesiton 

we cannot do step variance for measuring kinematic continutiy because most gpxs are sampled smartly, no 1 sampling scheme is followed. from what ive observed too, there is pair to pair variation often in sampling rate. so delta d without time isnt the sauce ig. about bearing changem that isnt the sauce either. let me give an example suppose the samplign rate is 10 seconds, i travelled north for 5 seconds then deaccelerated and turned around at 7 second, and walked back till the 5 second mark. on the gpx it will appear as displacement from 0 to the point i reached at 5 second in the 10 sec interval . the data about me deaccelrating and turning around is lost. distance traveled is more than the displacemnent that was logged. on the next delta t and d pair it will appear that i suddenly turned around but then this can be a niche case. idk bruh

okay so scoping out what gpxs even raise these questions. a gpx with backtracks, duplicates. if a gpx is forward order only we do not calculate any of these things. and move onto other corredciotn and smoothing. 
about the gpxs that do raise questions, there i suppose what the idea will be is to point/block check the difference in continuity. there prolly wont be gpxs where both are valid. if both come out to be valid, then it depends on what we are fixing.  comparison fails because both yeild equally bad or good results we keep the gpx ordering

i just thought of an edge case. suppose the gpx is forward only with one non adjacent duplicate. the gpx data is spiky. suppose the second duplicate coords are actually the correct path. the first duplicate is a spike that is actually near the future coords of the track. then both will yeild equally bad result okay nvm i didnt cook anything, i just answered my own question. then we keep the same order. 
it will be cleaned up later on. 

a question  shudnt the exisiting kinematic outleir removal for already forward pairs be done before we do all the solving of hte gpx via rearrangement? because if kinematically anomolous forwards pairs are already present in the gpx in that case, they can be deemed as worse than a duplicate or overlapping backtracking block just beacuse they had a bigger spike than what the duplicate wud yield upon posiiton change


differentiate between non overlapping and overlapping points. we always rearrange the the backtracked blocks/points if they fit perfectly like a puzzle piece in a missing time sequence in the gpx. this whole kinematic check model is for being applied on duplicate tiemstmpa and overlapping time blocks only. 


for every singleton and even a block, the check kinematic check will need to happen with the point ahead of the insertion and point behind the start of the insertion. there collective summary will be the best comparison as opposed to one. for example we are comparing the kinematics at a point which has a timestamp duplicate elsewhere in the gpx. so the comparison of the speeds that both the timestamp duplicates yield and if use more filters (cause ive not fully decided yet on which ones to use reliably) shud include the metrics with point ahead and point behind. what this enables us to do is give us another check. which is closest to avg. i might not have phrased it correctly but suppose one duplicate yields speeds 5km per hr, 30km/hr which are both  viable but the other timestamp yields 20km/hr, 20km/hr. then it is natural to choose the second one duplicate since the acceleration change aren't much. this might be a little too interpretative but this can be solidly backed by comparing with the speeds ahead and behind on the forward time track that is correctly present around the duplicate time. 1 3 5 7 9 5. we see 5 is duplicate. we compare both the duplicaets by comparing the summary of the kinematics yielded by both with 3 and 7. both forward and backward. for verifying that if 5ph and 30kph is right yield by duplicate 1 with time 3 and 7or 20kph and 20kph is right yielded by duplicate 2 with time 3 and 7. we check the speeds between 1 and 3 ,  7 and 9. if 1 and 3 speed is relatively lower and 7 and 9 is higher, in that case the most likely correct is duplicate 1. if they are relatively constant then in that case  duplicate 2. but its still while assuming that the forward clock only points are consistent enough, which most defineltly aren't. 
i keep getting in this circular loop bruh

about overlapping vs non overlapping mismatch timestmap order. what do we deam as a overlap and what not? like suppose thereis a single backtracking timestmap. and its not a duplciate of any kind. then how do we categorize that its a missing peice or not. for singeltons we will have to be aware of the sampling rates too. if there is none then we are pretty cooked. like suppose a sequence is this - 1 2 3 4 5 7 8 9 6 here we can tell that 6 is a missing piece that fits perfectly butsame cannot be said for this sequence - 1 10 20 30 ... 100 6. even if 6 is not a overlap and divides a gap into two smaller ones. like for non overlaps - especially singleton rearrangement we will have to do kinematic check. for singletons only that are not a part of a derived block what im thinking  is another check can be added. earlier in the discussion, vector angle change threshold was proposed. since its a singleton only we can check how much deviation from path the then gap the introduced point introduces. this is much up for debate because that might genuinyl be the path if it fits kinematics. 

what the model becomes now 
- forward only clocks dont run through any of these checks and are direcltly forwarded. 
- non overlapping mismatch blocks that are forward only locally and fit perfectly as a puzzle piece are directly rearranged 
a check for reveresed track with a threshold for similaity in reveresd order of the orignal track and rearranged track according to timestmap is done. if it passes then we keep the reversed order. 


the questions rn are, how shud blocks and singletons be evaluated. which one goes first? I think that solving the singeltons first is the right way to go and then we evaluate the blocks. 
about the blocks - we will need to determine blocks within blocks too. where they belong where they dont. like a randomised backtrack that are all below the watermark but not increasing scheme in of themselves. they shud be treated as singletons. if they are are linearly increasing but all are just below the watermark, then in taht case they shud be treated as a block. 
idk im getting quite confused here because i feel like im assuming way too much shi here. 

final plan for mvp:
no timestamps present/unparsable, flag it and forward
forward only clocks get no correction and rearrangement except for adjacent duplicate checks and then forwarded for kinematic correction 
hasforwarddelta = false but has anytimestamp = true then we check for reversal of gpx array.
non overlapping locally forward blocks that fit a gap cleanly deterministic rearrange. 
singleton in a gap shud be sampling rate compatible.it shudnt be create lower deltas than the lowest sampling rate. and before that a kinematic check needs to happen too. we check what the insertion of that backtrack wud lead to in terms of time delta division and check those two time deltas created against the sampling clusters. a point which upon insertion at its timestamped correct place wont be invalid just because it created two time deltas that dont exactly match sampling clusters. the only flag we can compare against is the lowest time delta cluster. if there already xists a gap and the insertion made it one point more resolute then its good. 
same cords same time duplicates - drop one of them. 
any other type of duplicates - kinematic checks and neighbour referencing if both show compatibility.
now about overlaps at least detection is important even if we are just flagging it currently for the mvp. because those sections are not going to be evaluated at all.

a small note -  we are not doing kinematic cleaning here or before this process. meaning we are not comparing any single kinematic against a threshold alone for validity/discarding. the comparison will always happen with the threshold for 2 or more points. which one gives better continuity . not "this one is 100kph so we discarding it". ofc there is a threshold comparison in this too but the leniency is much more because we have to keep in mind that none kinematics have been cleaned yet and jitters are included too. so hard capping 40kph will be too strict and basically do cleaning in this layer which is wrong. 


Implementation: 
- the correction layer will first view the information from the timestamp audit - to check for points that cannot even participate or to see if the full track cannot participate by reviewing the missing/unparsable points and point count. 
- the correction layer will also refer to the sampling modules output for clustering regimes detected for backtrack insertions to right places if divide the gap meaningfully why remaining kinematically continuous. backtrack insertion are tricky so i was thinking about another check for clustering matching. we take the 5 valid pairs ahead of the gap and 5 valid pairs behind the gap and check the sampling clusters there, if the gap created by the insertion matches none, then we dont keep the backtrack even in its orignal place, we flag it to be dropped in the next correction layer altogether.
- correction layer will read all the other info presented by the tiemstamp module like duplicate timestamp and waht not. 
- before any of this I think overlap detection is the first thing to be done after participation checks are done for sections that can participate and for the full track.
distiction between timestamp equality overlap and non equality overlap is important ig. 
